metrics transform processor README (#339)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib: processor/metricstransformprocessor/README.md

- Rename Collisions will result in a no operation on the metrics data
  - e.g. If want to rename a metric or label to `new_name` while there is already a metric or label called `new_name`, this operation will not take any effect. There will also be an error logged

## Description
The metrics transform processor can be used to rename metrics, labels, or label values. It can also be used to perform aggregations on metrics across labels or label values.

## Capabilities
- Rename metrics (e.g. rename `cpu/usage` to `cpu/usage_time`)
- Rename labels (e.g. rename `cpu` to `core`)
- Rename label values (e.g. rename `done` to `complete`)
- Aggregate across label sets (e.g. only want the label `usage`, but don’t care about the labels `core`, and `cpu`)
  - Aggregation_type: sum, average, max
- Aggregate across label values (e.g. want `memory{slab}`, but don’t care about `memory{slab_reclaimable}` & `memory{slab_unreclaimable}`)
  - Aggregation_type: sum, average, max

## Configuration
```yaml
# name is used to match with the metric to operate on. This implementation doesn’t # utilize the filtermetric’s MatchProperties struct because it doesn’t match well 

> # with what I need at this phase. All is needed for this processor at this stage is # a single name string that can be used to match with selected metrics. The list of # metric names and the match type in the filtermetric’s MatchProperties struct are # unnecessary. Also, based on the issue about improving filtering configuration, it # seems like this struct is subject to be slightly modified.

Reviewer: There are some line break issues there (multiple #s on one line)

  -action: update_label
   label: <current_label1>
   new_label: <new_label>
   value_actions:
     -value: <current_label_value>
      new_value: <new_label_value>

  # aggregate_labels action aggregates metrics across labels (e.g. only want  
  # the label `usage`, but don’t care about the labels `core`, and `cpu`)
  -action: aggregate_labels
   # label_set contains a list of labels that will remain after the aggregation.    
   # The excluded labels will be aggregated by the way specified by  
   # aggregation_type.
   label_set: [labels...]
   aggregation_type: {sum, average, max}

  # aggregate_label_values action aggregates labels across label values (e.g. want  
  # memory{slab}, but don’t care about memory{slab_reclaimable} &   
  # memory{slab_unreclaimable})
  -action: aggregate_label_values
   label: <label>
   # aggregated_values contains a list of label values that will be aggregated by  
   # the way specified by aggregation_type into new_value. The excluded label  
   # values will remain.
   aggregated_values: [values...]
   new_value: <new_value> 
   aggregation_type: {sum, average, max}
```

## Examples

### Insert New Metric
```yaml

> # create host/cpu/usage_time from host/cpu/usage

Reviewer: This comment doesn't match the name below (`usage_time` vs `utilization`)

Also probably change slashes to dots so this is closer to what the semantic conventions are likely to be (i.e. `host.cpu.time` instead of `host/cpu/time`)

> # Metrics Transform Processor <span style="color:red">**(UNDER DEVELOPMENT - NOT READY FOR USE)**</span>

Reviewer: I don't think the html works, at least not when I look at the preview

Author: Thanks for catching this. For some reason, I didn't realize that at all because it works fine on my local preview.

> - <span style="color:red">ONLY support **single-batch processing** on metrics to avoid conflicts of different batches with the same time-series</span>

Reviewer 2: What about saying something like this `This ONLY supports renames/aggregations **within individual metric batches**. It does not do any aggregation across batches, and so is not suitable for aggregating metrics from multiple sources (e.g. multiple nodes or clients), but only for aggregating metrics from a single source that groups its metrics for a particular time period into a single batch (e.g. host metrics from the VM the collector is running on).`

Author: This looks great!

> - <span style="color:red">This ONLY supports renames/aggregations **within individual metric batches**.</span> It does not do any aggregation across batches, so it is not suitable for aggregating metrics from multiple sources (e.g. multiple nodes or clients). At this point, it is only for aggregating metrics from a single source that groups its metrics for a particular time period into a single batch (e.g. host metrics from the VM the collector is running on).

Reviewer: Is batch the the right word here? It sounds weird to me. I'm not actually sure on the right terminology, but I think a metric is defined as the aggregation of individual measurements? (in which case you could just say "This ONLY supports renames/aggregations **within individual metrics**)

(I could be wrong on that)

Author: Actually, this makes sense to me because at this point, all operations are done based on a metric name match, which means all within one metric

- <span style="color:red">Rename Collisions will result in a no operation on the metrics data</span>
  - e.g. If want to rename a metric or label to `new_name` while there is already a metric or label called `new_name`, this operation will not take any effect. There will also be an error logged

> 

Reviewer: There's a new convention to put: "Supported pipeline types: metrics" at the top

## Description

> The objective of this metrics transform processor is to give OpenTelemetry Collector users the flexibility to rename and aggregate metrics in desired ways so that the metrics are more relevant and cheaper to the users. This processor can be used to simply rename metrics names, labels and label values to conform with any requirements of an existing backend. This processor can also perform aggreagtions on metrics across labels or label values, so that the data can cost less and provide more insights for specific use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metrics transform processor can be used to rename metrics names, labels and/or label values, and to perform aggregations on metrics across labels and/or label values.
```

I don't think you need to justify the need for this component in the README. It's better to just focus on what it does and how to use it imo.

## Capabilities
- rename metrics (e.g. rename `cpu/usage` to `cpu/usage_time`)
- rename labels (e.g. rename `cpu` to `core`)
- rename label values (e.g. rename `done` to `complete`)
- aggregate across label sets (e.g. only want the label `usage`, but don’t care about the labels `core`, and `cpu`)
  - aggregation_type: sum, average, max
- aggregate across label values (e.g. want `memory{slab}`, but don’t care about `memory{slab_reclaimable}` & `memory{slab_unreclaimable}`)

>   - aggregation_type: sum, average, max

Reviewer: Start with caps for all these bullet points?

  # memory{slab_unreclaimable})
  -action: aggregate_label_values
   label: <label>
   # aggregated_values contains a list of label values that will be aggregated by  
   # the way specified by aggregation_type into new_value. The excluded label  
   # values will remain.
   aggregated_values: [values...]
   new_value: <new_value> 
   aggregation_type: {sum, average, max}
```

## Examples

### Insert New Metric
```yaml
# create host/cpu/usage_time from host/cpu/usage
name: host/cpu/usage
action: insert
new_name: host/cpu/utilization
operations:
  ...
```

### Rename Labels
```yaml
# rename the label cpu to core
operations:
  - action: update_label
    label: cpu
    new_label: core
```

### Aggregate Labels
```yaml
# aggregate away everything but `state` using summation
...
operations:
  -action: aggregate_labels
   label_set: [ state ]
   aggregation_type: sum
```

### Aggregate Label Values
```yaml
# combine slab_reclaimable & slab_unreclaimable by summation
...
operations:
  -action: aggregate_label_values
   label: state
   aggregated_values: [ slab_reclaimable, slab_unreclaimable ]
   new_value: slab 
   aggregation_type: sum
```

> ## Possible Extensions

Reviewer: I don't think we need this in the README

> # Metrics Transform Processor (Currently Under Development, Use with Caution)

Reviewer 2: Could we make the caveat a big stronger here, e.g. `(UNDER DEVELOPMENT - NOT READY FOR USE)`

> - Only support single-batch processing on metrics to avoid conflicts of different batches with the same time-series

Reviewer 2: Could you spell this out a big more and make it bolder / more highlighted?

> - Rename Collisions will result in a no operation on the metrics data

Reviewer 2: Could you explain this further or clarify it a bit more?

   # values will remain.
   aggregated_values: [values...]
   new_value: <new_value> 
   aggregation_type: {sum, average, max}
```

## Examples

### Insert New Metric
```yaml
# create host/cpu/usage_time from host/cpu/usage
name: host/cpu/usage
action: insert
new_name: host/cpu/utilization
operations:
  ...
```

### Rename Labels
```yaml
# rename the label cpu to core
operations:
  - action: update_label
    label: cpu
    new_label: core
```

### Aggregate Labels
```yaml
# aggregate away everything but `state` using summation
...
operations:
  -action: aggregate_labels
   label_set: [ state ]
   aggregation_type: sum
```

### Aggregate Label Values
```yaml
# combine slab_reclaimable & slab_unreclaimable by summation
...
operations:
  -action: aggregate_label_values
   label: state
   aggregated_values: [ slab_reclaimable, slab_unreclaimable ]
   new_value: slab 
   aggregation_type: sum
```

## Possible Extensions
- Supporting custom types of aggregation (e.g. defined by a formula)
- Support aggregations of non-simple metric types (distributions, etc)
- Support aggregation over time
- Utilizing regex to select metrics

> ## Thanks to

Reviewer 2: Though I appreciate this section (and attribution is good general principle) what would you think about removing this from the public readme since once this is public the attribution is usually done via the commit history?

  -action: update_label
   label: <current_label1>
   new_label: <new_label>
   value_actions:
     -value: <current_label_value>
      new_value: <new_label_value>

  # aggregate_labels action aggregates metrics across labels (e.g. only want the label `usage`, but don’t care about the labels `core`, and `cpu`)
  -action: aggregate_labels
   # label_set contains a list of labels that will remain after the aggregation. The excluded labels will be aggregated by the way specified by aggregation_type.
   label_set: [labels...]
   aggregation_type: {sum, average, max}

  # aggregate_label_values action aggregates labels across label values (e.g. want memory{slab}, but don’t care about memory{slab_reclaimable} & memory{slab_unreclaimable})
  -action: aggregate_label_values
   label: <label>
   # aggregated_values contains a list of label values that will be aggregated by the way specified by aggregation_type into new_value. The excluded label values will remain.
   aggregated_values: [values...]
   new_value: <new_value> 
   aggregation_type: {sum, average, max}
```

## Examples

> ### Insert New Metric

Reviewer 3: What would the config look like if I'd like to rename more than one metric? I maybe missing the context, but it appears to me like one can only operate on a single metric per processor config. Is that correct?

Author: Sorry, it was actually a bit out of date. I just updated the new version, which has a `transforms` field that accepts a list, which can be used to transform more than one metric.

Reviewer: Now that your other PR is quite far along, I recommend you just incorporate this README into your other PR and close this one. We can merge this together with the implementation once that's ready

Author: Yea that works too!
